food prices are spiking again in Africa
not just for temporary or seasonal
reasons but in part due to long-term
structural changes as with the last food
price spike in 2007 and 2008 there are
rapid knock-on effects in low income
countries as Bora segments of the
population are hit by higher living
costs prices for both oil and non-oil
commodities rose considerably in 2010 in
response to strong global demand but
also due to supply shocks for some
commodities
rapidly rising food prices ask important
macroeconomic policy questions of
decision-makers in emerging and
developing economies like those in
Senegal's National Assembly right behind
me here inflation in Senegal turned
positive in mid-2010 for the first time
in more than a year and the main driver
behind the acceleration has been higher
food prices Senegal has agreed a policy
support instrument with the
International Monetary Fund which means
the country does not need to borrow
money but has the IMF's backing for its
current policies this signals to other
development partners that the country's
economy is on a sound footing the IMF
had some advice for the authorities on
food price policy so when the news about
increasing food prizes all over the
world came up for there was a lot of
discussion in the government on how to
avoid the troubles that were
experiencing in 2008 and now the
government is studying about measures to
implement in case this trend of prizes
goes on we had recommended to the
government to avoid the generalized
subsidies that were shown to be non
effective in reaching the most
vulnerable part of the population the
sharp pick up in food and fuel prices
stands to make a significant impact on
many non oil exporting countries rising
food prices are likely to affect the
urban poor in particular given the high
share of food in their consumption
baskets in response governments will
need to consider targeted social safety
nets and how to pay for them the
government has already an opportunity
because it has already a program in
place that provides food to kids at
school and of course this give
incentives to kids to come to school
especially from from the poorer family
and in a context where price of food
goes up maintaining and expanding such a
program would be a good targeted measure
that the helper maintaining kids at
school at the same time helping them
with good nutrition many countries
especially low and middle-income
economies are struggling with the
implications of higher food prices given
the adverse effects on poverty inflation
and in the case of importing countries
the balance of payments even though it
lies at the western edge of the Sahara
Desert Senegal has surface water
supplies that support irrigation but
despite this agricultural potential the
country is dependent on imports to feed
its population Senegal is particularly
vulnerable to spikes in grain prices as
it imports much of its grain supplies
the increase in food prices is of course
bad news for consumers all around the
world but the poor as well as consumers
in emerging and developing economies in
general or hit harder by higher food
prices because food represents a much
larger share of their overall spending
senegal's authorities have acted to help
shield the country's poor from
international food price volatility and
also to support the two-thirds of
Senegal's population who depend on
agriculture for work and money in 2008
the government launched a drive to make
the country self-sufficient in food the
effort has already doubled grain
production and could yet set an example
to other low-income and emerging market
countries on how to address volatile
world food prices
you